Hello, everyone. Welcome to a new episode of the
Di Center. I'm your host, as always, Ricardo Lopez,
and today I'm joined by Doctor Brad Duchaine. He's
a professor in the Department of Psychological and Brain
Sciences at Dartmouth College. He uses neuropsychology, psychophysics, and
neuroimaging to explore the cognitive neurodevelopmental and genetic basis
of social perception. And today we're going to talk
about mostly about face perception, prosopagnosia. And prosopo metamorphosia,
yeah, it's, it's a really a mouthful. So Doctor
Duchaine, thank you for taking the time to come
on the show. It's a pleasure to have
you on. Thanks a lot for inviting me, Ricardo.
I've listened to many episodes of your podcast, so
it's really great to be on here.
Thank you. So, let's start with a broader question.
What is social perception? What aspects of perception connect
to the social aspects of our lives?
Sure, yeah, so. In order to make sense of
the social information that's around us, we often have
to use our perceptual abilities, so vision, audition, other
sorts of perceptual abilities to interpret that information and
um sort of make sense of it. Much of
this goes on, um, it's primarily vision and audition,
and my lab studies the visual side of social
perception. So trying to understand the information and faces,
and people's bodies, and how they move and such
sort those sorts of information.
And how is face perception specifically processed by the
brain?
Yeah, that's a complicated question that a lot of
people are working on. Um, AND, um, there are
a lot of different areas in the brain that
contribute to face processing. Many of them are in
the occipital and temporal lobe, but we also see
that there are areas in the frontal lobe that
contribute to face processing. These areas form a network,
so they're connected up with one another, um, and
they're able to generate, you know, these immediate percepts
that we have of faces where we're able to
say who somebody is, how they're feeling, where they're
looking. We also make inferences about, say, how trustworthy
we think they are, how attractive they think we
are, and these all, these sorts of perceptions all
happen within the blink of an eye. Um, AND
so we've got a highly specialized system in our
brains that is carrying out that, um, those computations.
But are there any face selective neurons? Are there
any neurons specialized in face perception?
There are. So, if I were to put you
into a scanner and we showed you faces and
objects, the first thing, what I would do to
look at your face network is identify those areas
that show a much stronger response to faces than
to objects. And if we did that within your
occipital and temporal lobes, maybe we'd find something like
12 to 14 little face, what we call face
selective areas. Those are blueberry sized regions and as
I said earlier, they're connected up. Then if we
were able to go in there and record from
individual neurons, we would find that those, those face
selective areas consist almost entirely of neurons that respond
to faces and faces only. Occasionally, you can find
another stimulus that has enough sort of stimulus characteristics
that it can drive a face neuron, but it's
still a phase selective neuron.
And face perception has some temporal characteristics to it,
right? So, what is the importance of the temporal
characteristics of face perception and how are they processed
by the brain?
Yeah, so face perception, as I said earlier, takes
place very quickly and um people working primarily with
EEG but also sometimes with intracranial recordings have been
able to track some of the processes that contribute
to face processing. So, maybe around 100 milliseconds, there's
an important event, 170 milliseconds, 250 out at around
say 400 to 600 milliseconds. So there's these different
steps that need to take place for face processing
to, to operate effectively. What exactly each one of
those steps is, we don't have a great understanding,
but we know that there's, there's sort of major
events at certain temporal milestones.
So tell us about how we tend to have
highly accurate familiar face recognition, but also error prone
performance with unfamiliar faces.
Yeah, so this is a point that Mike Burton
in in York in England has really made a
lot of. And so, you know, if you were
to see a friend, you wouldn't have any difficulty
recognizing them, even from just say a little bit
of their face, maybe under less than ideal circumstances,
maybe poor lighting. Um, AND yet, Um, if you
see an unfamiliar face and you get a good
look at it, you're likely to have a tough
time knowing if you encounter that face again 10
minutes later in a slightly different view. Um, AND
so what Mike would say about that is, we
just don't have robust representations that can handle the
many different viewpoints that we see faces from if
we haven't seen it from lots of different viewpoints,
under lots of different lighting. Um, SO just seeing
that one unfamiliar face doesn't allow you to generate
a, uh, the sort of representation that's gonna be
all that effective.
Does that have any implications for eyewitness identification and
policy?
Yeah, that has major implications for eyewitness identification. So
what it says is, if people are making identifications
involving people that they know, we should have high
confidence in those identifications. On the other hand, and
this has been shown over and over, if people
are making identifications of unfamiliar people, who they've often
seen in extremely stressful situations, um, they're like, there's
a good chance that they'll be inaccurate with those.
And so we really need to Be quite sort
of skeptical of people's confidence in those sorts of
um evaluations. Another thing, I think maybe later we'll
talk a little about individual differences in face perception,
but one thing I think that legal systems should
also um be aware of is that because there
is a lot of difference in how good people
are with face recognition. That's something that we should
be considering if we've got somebody who's on the
stand and is saying that they recognize somebody in
a certain situation. If they've got really good face
recognition, should put more credence in their, their identification.
If they have poor face recognition, we should put
less into it.
So let's talk then about what you mentioned there.
There is individual variation in face perception. Is human
face recognition ability something that varies between individuals and
if so, in what ways does it vary?
Yeah, so this is something I, I, I suspect
people were aware of this informally in the past,
but it's really become a topic of study over
the last 25 or so years that people have
realized that there's a Wide variety of face recognition
abilities. And this is true not just for, when
I say face recognition, I'm talking about identifying an
individual from their face, but this is true for
other aspects of face perception. So how effectively people
can recognize expressions, how well they can tell the
age of a face, and it's true really for
all psychological abilities. And so you can think about
face recognition ability as a normal distribution. You've got
some people in one tail who are very poor
with it. We call those individuals developmental prosopagnosics. We've
got other people on the other end who are
super recognizers who are just fantastic when it comes
to face recognition ability. And then in the middle
are the, as are most people who've got, you
know, decent face recognition, but it's not particularly bad
and it's not particularly good. And these differences in
people appear to be pretty stable across time.
And uh is this face recognition abilities something that
is heritable?
Yeah, they are. So there have been a couple
of good studies. We carried out a study in
2010, Jeremy Wilmer and, and, um, I and a
few and some other colleagues. We did a twin
study in which we looked at identical twins and
fraternal twins. So the identical twins share all of
their genes, the fraternal twins share half their genes.
What we found is that the correlation in between
performance and the identical twins was quite high. It
was around 0.7, so quite strong correlation. In the
identical twins, or pardon me, in the fraternal twins,
it was 0.3. So it's less than half of
the correlation that we found in the identical twins,
which indicates that almost all the individual differences in
how well people can recognize a face is due
to genetic differences. There was a similar study with
a larger sample that was done by Robert Plowman's
lab 5 years after we did ours, that found
very similar results.
So let's get into some of the deviations from
the norm when it comes to face perception. What
is prosopagnosia?
Yeah, so prosagnosia is a condition where people have
great difficulty recognizing facial identity, despite not having any,
say, low-level visual problems, um, and don't have more
general cognitive problems. So they've got to have difficulties
at the level of visual recognition. And these are,
a lot of my career has been spent studying
people with prosopagnosia.
And this prosopagnosia is something that people are born
with, or is it acquired?
Both are true. So, for a long time, say,
going back to the early 20th century, and you
can even find examples of it in the neurological
literature in the, in the 19th century, there have
been people reported who had normal face recognition ability
and then suffered brain damage and lost their ability
or at least it was severely impaired, um. Lost
their ability to recognize face as well. And so,
this is often fairly obvious to people, you know,
you wake up in the hospital, people are coming
in to see you, and you can't recognize their
face any longer. Um, SO it's a real difference.
What took us a lot longer to recognize the
existence of was developmental prosopagnosia. So, people with developmental
prosopagnosia can have face recognition abilities that are just
as poor as what we see in acquired prosopagnosia.
But of course, there was no before and after
for them. They were, they've been bad with faces,
presumably their entire lives. Of course, we don't actually,
we're not able to measure what happens in those
first few years, but my assumption is that it's
probably there, probably even prior to birth, um, and
so they have great difficulty throughout life, um, and
so that's why we call them developmental.
And what do we know more generally or more
broadly about the theology of prosopagnosia? What causes it
exactly? Yeah, so earlier on, I was mentioning the
face processing network, um, and the regions that are
particularly important for causing prosopagnosia tend to be right
hemisphere, occipital, and, and temporal lobe phase selective areas.
Um, THERE'S an interesting Mystery in the face processing
literature and that if you look, if I were
to put you in the scanner and identify your
face selective areas, you'd have face selective areas in
the left hemisphere, and face selective areas in the
right hemisphere. They look pretty similar to one another,
they're a little more pronounced in the right hemisphere.
But it's really rare for somebody who, um, to
have left, unilateral left hemisphere damage, so damage just
to the left hemisphere and then become prosopagnosic. On
the other hand, it's common for people when they've
had right hemisphere damage to the face network to
become prosopagnosic. So there's this really symmetry that we
still don't understand, but the right hemisphere, um, is
much more important for face process than the left,
and it's, it's either damage to those areas in
the case of acquired prosopagnosia. Or it's just a
failure to develop the sort of the face processing
network normally in the developmental cases.
And when it comes to what is affected neurologically
in prosopagnosia, is it just a face specific visual
processing or also some aspects of more domain general
visual processing?
Yeah, this is gonna be a common answer for
me for these sorts of questions. It's gonna vary
from case to case. And so we work with
some individuals who have difficulties recognizing faces, but they
also might have difficulties recognizing cars, um, and recognizing
mugs and what have you. Um, THOSE sorts of
cases are challenging to interpret theoretically because it could
be that they've got some general purpose process that's
contributing to recognition of a lot of different categories.
On the other hand, it might be that they've
got separate mechanisms that are, say, important for face
recognition, and important for car recognition, and both of
them have been knocked out at the same time
because they're neighboring regions. Um, The more interesting cases
theoretically are those that just have difficulties with face
recognition. Um, AND so they, we've documented and other
labs have as well, a number of highly face
selective cases, so they have difficulty sort of knowing
whose face they're looking at, but they can recognize
cars perfectly normally. And maybe later on, if we
talk about prosopub metamorphopsia, we could talk about evidence
that also speaks to this question. It's probably also
worth mentioning. There was a really fascinating case studied
by Morris Moskovitz's lab in Toronto. Um, THIS guy
is named Mr. CK, and Mr. CK was jogging
one day and got hit by a car. And
Mr. CK can still recognize upright faces perfectly normally,
but he can't recognize objects. He's got very severe
object diagnosia. So, you know, Well, this is a
podcast. Maybe people can't see those who can't see
it, but I'm holding up a mug, and that's
also the video version, so people are.
If you were to show this to Mr. CK,
not only would he not be able to say,
oh, that's Brad's particular mug, he would have difficulty
even knowing that it's a mug. So he's got
really severe object diagnosia and yet can recognize upright
faces perfectly normally. Um, AND so, that's the opposite
of prosopagnosia. It's severe object diagnosia with intact face
perception. So, we call that a neuropsychology a double
dissociation, um, and those, that's a particularly important type
of evidence for establishing the independence of different processes.
But then people can have both problems or,
yeah, so, you know, if you get a, let's
say you suffer a major stroke, and a lot
of different high-level visual areas are knocked out, one
can lose face recognition and object recognition and, and
those, that's, of course, very difficult to deal with
for those individuals. It's also for researchers, it's hard
to make sense of that because they have such
broad deficits, it's hard to know what's causing it.
Right.
What is the psychosocial impact of prosopagnosia during childhood
specifically?
Yeah, so we published a paper on this around
10 years ago. And so these are people, the
people we study are those who have developmental prosopagnosia,
which I, I should have mentioned is much more
common than acquired prosopagnosia. Um, THROUGH, through our website,
which is faceblind.org, we hear from lots, maybe 2
to 3 prosopagnosics per day. Maybe 5% or less
are acquired. 95% are developmental cases. So it's much
more common than acquired, even though it's, it's interesting,
it took us so much longer to recognize the
existence of developmental prosopagnosia, probably because they didn't have
the before and after that I was talking about.
Um, BUT in kids with developmental prosopagnosia, it's very
challenging because first off, the parents usually don't realize
that the child has prosopagnosia. Um, IT can be
helpful when a parent themselves is prosopagnosic, so they
might be on the lookout for it, although we've
also heard from a number of people who've said,
you know, I said to my mom, I can't
recognize faces, and she said, nobody can recognize faces,
don't worry about it. Um, BUT the, the sort
of problems that these kids run into, they don't
know that they've got a particular problem, and they're
in this sea of individuals who they have trouble
knowing who's who. Um, THEY tend to latch on
to people who are visually distinctive, or have something
else, like an unusual voice, so they know who
that person is. And they can be seen as
defiant. So, you know, imagine a teacher asks a
student, hey, could you pass these assignments back to
your classmates? Well, they don't wanna do that, um,
because they don't know who, who the people are,
um, around them. So, it's, it's. It's very challenging
and often it's a real eye-opener for the parents
and then eventually the children, when they finally come
to realize that the difficulties that the, the person
is experiencing are due to problems with face recognition.
It makes sense of lots of things for them.
Right. So, and how can they distinguish between different
people? I mean, of course, it's more limited than
in normally developing children, but is it through voice
that is through sound? ARE there any other cues
that they're taking?
Yeah, so it's all the different channels that we
use to recognize people. Um, SO they do use
voice a lot. They'll also use, say just body,
body shape, the way people move, um. Um, CONTEXT
is often very important for them. So imagine you're
in a small office and there's only 3 other
people in your office. You wouldn't have any difficulty
recognizing the people if their face was covered because
there's lots of other information you could use to
figure out who that is. And developmental prosopagnosics become
very good at using this information because they have
to rely on it. Um, uh, I had a
guy that I wrote my dissertation on a guy
named Bill Schozer who lived in San Francisco. And
Bill grew up in a small town in the
Ozark Mountains, where kids basically wore the same clothes
as in 1940s and 1950s. Kids wore the same
jeans every day. So Bill became a blue jeans
specialist. He would focus on their pants, and he'd
say, Oh, I know that that's Chuck cause he
wears that particular pair of pants. And even as
an adult in the 90s when I was testing
Bill, he was still using jeans to recognize people.
And I remember one day we were walking along
chatting. And he said, well, last time you were
up here, you wore those 505s, and they had
a little scuff in the back of the right
leg. And so I got home and I checked,
and sure enough, there was a scuff in them.
So, yeah, that people will often focus on particular
things that they can use reliably each time they
encounter somebody.
Uh, AMONG the general population, what is the percentage
of people who suffer from prosopagnosia?
Yeah, so if we think about that normal distribution
I mentioned earlier, a face recognition ability. The people
with developmental prosopagnosia are going to be in one
of the tails. Well, this is my tale, but
for the viewers here will be over on this
side. And, you know, where you draw the line
for what is prosopagnosia is subjective. There's no clear
cutoff. Uh, WHAT researchers have tended to do is
look at that bottom 2% of the distribution. That's
who they tended to call, that's who we tend
to call prosopagnosic. Now, are they really qualitatively different
than the people that 2.1%? Of course not, no.
And plus our, our measures are pretty noisy in
terms of categorizing people. There's always noise in any
of these measures, but it's that group. So, so
maybe something like 1 in 50 people have difficulties
that really affect them on a daily basis. So
if I give a talk to a decent sized
audience about prosopagnosia, it's very common for one or
two people afterwards to come up and tell me
about experiences that they've had that sound like prosopagnosia.
So I asked you about the psychosocial impact of
prosopagnosia during childhood. How about adulthood? I, I, what
is, uh, what are its psychosocial impacts on adults?
And I mean, are there differences between how it
affects children and adults?
Yeah, I wouldn't say there's, there are clear differences.
For the most part, similar sort of difficulties that
adults have. Um, YOU know, in some ways, the
consequences. SOMETIMES can, or the, the effects of it
can be more consequential. I think about participants who
I've tested, who look back at, say, missed romantic
opportunities. They walk past somebody that they're involved with,
and they don't recognize them, and the person takes
it as a snub, and that blows up the
relationship. Similarly, you know, you imagine you get into
an elevator and your supervisors in there. And you
look right at them, don't recognize them, and don't
acknowledge them. It doesn't go over well. People take
it very personally when you don't acknowledge them. And
so, um, it can be very difficult, particularly when
people don't realize that it's face recognition that they
have a problem with, which might sound surprising to
people, but, you know, you think of it say
similar to color deficiency, color, what people typically call
color blindness. Um, YOU know, it's hard to know
that your perception of the world. IS different than
other people's perception of the world. Many developmental prosopagnosics
will know something's off, but they don't know it's
specifically a problem with the face. When they don't
recognize people, they'll often attribute it to more general
characteristics, sort of personality flaws. Maybe I just don't
care enough about people. Maybe I'm not trying hard
enough. And so, this is another time where learning
about prosopagnosia is really useful for people, because they
realize it's just a little tweak in the visual
system that's causing their difficulties. It's not some character
flaw.
Is there a link between social perception and loneliness?
Yeah, there is. So I was involved in a
study and I had a fairly peripheral role in
this study, but uh Riotaca I published a paper
in I think it was 2012, and in there
we Measured loneliness in a group of typical participants,
so these are not prosopagnosics. And what we found
is that if we looked at their just behavioral
self-report measures of loneliness, that we found some um
structural differences in their left superior temporal sulcus, which
is a brain structure over here. Um, AND it
turned out that these individuals who are lonely also
had more difficulty re carrying out social perception tasks
like reading eye gaze, reading facial expressions. Um, THERE'S
a bit of a chicken and egg problem. It's
not clear whether the neurological problems preceded the behavioral
difficulties that they had, or whether they just didn't
get enough practice doing these, and so they weren't
very good and then you didn't develop those areas,
but it seems like that's a contributor to loneliness,
which I think in many ways makes sense. If
you're having trouble making sense of the social signals
around you, it's gonna be difficult, more difficult to
form those social bonds.
So we've been talking about face perception. I would
also like to ask you a couple of questions
now about, about face memory. In what ways does
one connect to the other? Does face perception connect
to face memory?
Yeah, that's something that's maybe not as well understood
as you would have hoped it would be at
this point. Um, SO, of course, you know, face
perception takes place first. You need to generate a
percept of the face that you're seeing, and then
you need to compare that percept to the faces
that you have stored in memory. Um, WHERE that
goes on is not well understood. Um, WE do
have a good sense about when it takes place.
We talked earlier about the temporal characteristics of phase
processing, and we can see that by 250 milliseconds
after a stimulus is presented, People are already matching
the incoming percept to memories. We see that this
EEG component, there's a stronger response if the person
is familiar with the face than if they're not
familiar with the face. Whereas, let's say we go
back to 170 milliseconds, there's no difference between familiar
and unfamiliar faces. So, it, memory is brought into
things very quickly, probably in some of these temporal
lobe areas or almost certainly in some of these
temporal lobe areas. How that plays out though is
not well understood.
Is face memory also affected in prosopagnosia?
Yeah, and in fact, Most people, when they're trying
to categorize people as prosopagnosic, do it based on
memory tests. So they, for example, we'll give them
a famous face test. We show them 60 famous
faces one at a time, and when we show
them to them, we crop them. So it's just
the internal part of the face. We don't want
to have hair, for example, it's something they can
use to identify them. Um. So we use face
memory tests. An awful lot of prosopagnosics though, also
have difficulties with face perception. So that proceeding step,
we even see prosopagnosics who have difficulty with what
we think of as a step that precedes face
perception, which is face detection. And by face detection,
we just mean the sort of somewhere in your
visual field, there's a face and your visual system
detects the presence of that. And I think we've
all had that experience where, you know, you get
the sense that someone is out in your periphery,
and you turn and you look and you, your
visual system is detected, the existence of a face
out there. Um, SO, memory is how we categorize
people, but a lot have perceptual problems.
Can prosopagnosia be improved in any way?
Yeah, that's something that a number of labs have
looked at. Joe Degutis down in Boston, Jason Barton
out in Vancouver. Um, THERE have been some encouraging
results, so modest improvements with training, so people say,
get on a computer, they spend 40 minutes making
decisions about faces, and what you find is that
they tend to do better on tests after that
than they did before. They also do better with
um Control groups that didn't do that sort of
testing, but did the pre-testing. The problem with these
results is that they tend to be pretty small
boosts, and they also don't persist. So, there's a
lot more work to be done when it comes
to improving face recognition in, in, in prosopagnosia.
So, let's move on then to Prosopo metamorphos. Uh,
WHAT is it?
Yeah, so this is something I'm very excited about.
My lab's been studying. Well, we first studied PMO
15 years ago or so, and we heard from
a woman who got in touch with us because
she told us that she was seeing distortions when
she would look at a face. So, the shape
of the face would change as she looked at
it, and it would become extremely distorted, um. For
her, we've done a lot of work with her
over the years. It's only faces. That's the only
thing that will distort on her. Um, EVERYTHING else
is, is, um, normal. As she looks at the
face, the face becomes more and more distorted over
time, um, so that, say by 10 seconds, it's
just a, a mess. Um, AND so that was,
we published a paper on her in 2014, and
then I got involved with a colleague of mine,
uh, George Almeida, who's actually in Queenra, um, and
he was working with a 59 year old man
who'd had a stroke. And this stroke left him
with what we call hemi PMO. So, most PMO,
if the distortions affect the whole face. In this
individual, it was just half of the face. So,
one half of the face looked normal, one half
of the face was usually was drooping. And um,
so George and I um wrote a paper about
this guy. And after that paper was published, heard
from a few more people who had, was having
these were having face distortions. So my lab created
the website, I think it was 2021, and we've
now heard from about 200 people around the world
who have face distortions. So, it turns out there's
a good number of these people out there. If
you look in the neurological literature, maybe there's 75
to 80 cases that have been published over the
last 125 years. But these individuals are out there
and as you can imagine, if you're looking at
a face and it's severely distorted, it's really disturbing.
And so this is a, a really difficult condition
to live with. It's also a condition we think
that's gonna provide a really interesting window into how
normal face perception works.
So is it less common than prosopagnosia?
It's far less common. Yeah. Yeah. So, you know,
before we've got this special face distortions website now
to find people. But in the 20 some years
before we had that website, we have this site
where we hear from prosopagnosics, we heard from like
20,000 people. I think we heard from two people
who had face distortions during that time. So I
think We would have been hearing from more people
if it was more common. Yeah, I think it's
very uncommon.
And what causes it?
That's something that we don't have a great understanding
of. One working hypothesis we have is that often
these distortions are caused by Deterioration or damage to
the connections between the face areas within the face
network. So we talked earlier about how there are
these different face selective areas. Of course, they're connected
up with one another. In the people that we've
been able to bring here to Dartmouth and scan,
we've seen that a substantial percentage of them have
what we call white matter abnormalities. So the white
matter, the cells that wrap around these connections, um,
you see something similar when you look in the
literature, um, Of the people who have hemi PMOs
are just distortions that affect one half of the
face. More than half of those people have white
matter abnormalities in the connection that connects the left
and right hemisphere visual regions, including that, that man
from Queenber who we, who we tested. Um, SO,
This is probably not true. This is too simple
a story, but you could imagine that white matter
damage causes face distortions, whereas when there's damage specifically
to a face selective area, then you result in
it results in prosopagnosia.
Right. Uh, FROM a neuroscientific and psychological perspective, in
what ways does prosopal metamorphosia differ from prosopagnosia?
Yeah, so It has a lot of advantage PMO
that is with Posopo metamorphosy because we don't wanna
say that long word every time, so we call
it PMO. Um, PMO has a lot of interesting
advantages when it comes to Sort of addressing theoretical
questions. One is that their distortions are so salient
that you really only need a couple trials to
find out if they see a distortion to a
particular type of stimulus. Um, SO one of the
big questions that I've been interested in throughout my
career has been understanding if there are mechanisms that
are specialized just for faces. And I've been talking
about them as if they, they exist, and I
do believe they exist, but it's still a matter
of debate within the literature. Um, IF I have
somebody with prosopagnosia and I were to ask them,
do you have difficulty recognizing tools? Well, it's hard
for them to know the answer to that question.
Um, uh, AND then, so if I want to
find that out, I need to run them on
a test that's probably gonna take 10 minutes to
run. On the other hand, if somebody has face
distortions, uh, I say, I want you to look
at this hammer here. I want you to tell
me, do you see a distortion? Um, THEY can
immediately look at it and tell me very quickly
whether they see a distortion or not. And so,
we've got data that we've recently collected where we
show individuals with PMO 1000 objects. So we've got
500 categories, 2 examples each. And so we're able
to move through 500 categories within a couple hours
with these individuals. We're also at the same time,
making sure that they're having distortions to faces while
they're looking at these objects, and they, they are.
And so it provides us to much more thoroughly
sample object space. And so when we find individuals
who see distortions to all 100 faces, we presented
them, and no distortions to any of the 1000
objects. And they also report, yeah, I've had this
condition for 14 years, and I've never seen a
distortion in a, in an object. I always see
distortions in faces. It's really powerful evidence for the
existence of face-specific processes.
Does the intensity of face distortions vary depending on
the context or on the stimulus in PMO?
Yeah, so we've been surprised. We've stumbled across a
couple ways that we can influence people's distortions. Um,
A very simple 11 day, one of my PhD
students was talking to a guy who has faced
distortions, and He, he, he showed him a face,
and the face happened to have eyeglasses on. So
he's looking at the face, he's got eyeglasses on,
and the guy said, no, no distortion there. And
Antonio was surprised and said, Hmm, no distortion, huh?
Whereas cause he'd been consistently seeing distortions. And the
participants said, Well, yeah, he's got glasses on. I've
noticed I don't see distortions on faces that have
glasses. And this is somebody who's got full face
distortions, so it's not just, say, around the eye
region. Um, SO we've now tested several people who
show substantial reduction in how strongly they see distortions
when eyeglasses are present. So that's kind of a
simple, easy way for people in daily life to
reduce their distortion. And we don't understand why that's
happening, and we need to look into it more.
Another thing that we've done more thorough work on
is the effect of color filters on face distortions.
Um, SO we've tested a few people who, if
they look at a face through a green filter,
their distortions are substantially reduced. On the other hand,
if they look through a red filter, their distortions
are amplified. Um, AND in fact, we looked across
the spectrum, and they show these kind of nice
sort of Linar patterns as you move through the
color through color space, um. And what it looks
like in those two, it's sort of roughly red,
green, you can think of it's not quite cyan
is actually the worst color for one individual. Then
we've got another woman who we work with, who
lives here in the US who we brought up.
She shows the opposite pattern. So for her now,
red is, sorry, I should be doing it this
way, red reduces distortions and green amplifies distortions. What
we haven't found is anybody whose distortions are influenced
by the blue yellow dimension. This is, I don't
know that you want me to go into this,
but there's basically two dimensions in color. And so
we're seeing that only one of those two dimensions
seems to influence phase perception, which fits nicely with
the theory about sort of why we, why we
evolved a third um cone for, for color percept
for color perception. But, um, so that's been a
real surprise to us that color would influence these
shape distortions strongly. Um, THE last thing that we
found in some people is that The asymmetries in
the face, in between the two halves of the
face, often drive distortions. So if we show an
individual a perfectly symmetric face that we've created in
the lab where we flip one half of the
face over. We sometimes find that individuals say, my
distortions are much weaker for that face, or they'll
even say, I'm not having any distortions, um, when
they see that perfectly symmetric face. So there's something's
happening in the visual system when these asymmetries are
present.
So tell us more about that bit that you
mentioned about uh why we evolved the first cone
for color perception and how does that connect to
face perception?
Sure, yeah. So, so, um. Primates, because we went
through a long nocturnal phase, so many, so if
you look at most vertebrates, they have 4 different
photoreceptors that are used for color vision. Um, HOWEVER,
primates went through a long nocturnal phase, and during
that nocturnal phase, we lost two of the photoreceptors.
So we were down to two different photoreceptors. So
we had considerably reduced, um, uh, color sensitivity. Um,
AND then though, something like 25 million years ago
or so, a third photoreceptor emote, and that, that's
what we still have. We have 3 different cone
types in our visual system. And it's not clear
what the selection pressures were that drove the emergence
of this third cone type and, and as well
as the processing to, to make sense of that.
Um, ONE hypothesis that has been around for a
long time is that it's important for sort of
seeing the difference between foliage in the background behind
fruit. Um, AND so this is one that's important
for foraging, and that may well be a factor
in it, a good chance it is in fact.
Um, ANOTHER hypothesis, so that came along roughly 20
years ago is that This third photoreceptor emerged in
order to help us make sense of information and
faces and social perception more generally. Um, AND so,
Um, and that bit, that, that new photoreceptor allowed
us to make sense of red-green differences. And there
are a lot of red differences within the face
that we're able to read and make sense of.
And you also see other primates like mangils, for
example, will have skin patches back on their hips
that show different colors that Um, we would be
able to make sense of with that 3rd photoreceptor.
So this is a social perception hypothesis. And so
what this hypothesis suggests is that that the red-green
dimension is particularly closely tied to face and social
perception more generally. And so, thus, it wouldn't be
surprising if there's some special sort of modulation that
the red-green dimension can have on face perception if
they evolved in tandem with one another.
And is there good scientific evidence to support that
that hypothesis.
Depends what you consider good. I think it's pretty
good. So, um, there's a really interesting finding from
Bevil Conway's lab. Um, AGAIN, this is a little
complicated to explain, but what you do is you
put people into an environment in which there's only
one wavelength that's illuminating it. And when you put
these are sodium lamps that generate this single wavelength.
And when you get into this environment, everything looks
yellow. Um, THAT would be true for the mug
I was holding up. My shirt would have something
of a yellow glow, but there's one exception to
this, and that's the face. The human face in
these in these environments looks a little bit green.
Um, AND even if you look at compare, say
the neck, um, the neck doesn't look green. The
the skin on our hands doesn't look green. So
there's just something about the way the face is
processed in this unusual color environment that suggests there's
something different about the red-green dimension, um, for the
face than for all other aspects of the visual
world that we're trying to make sense of.
So is it the case that in certain cases
PMO affects the whole face and in other cases
it only affects certain individual facial features?
Yeah, that's right. I've already mentioned that some people
have distortions just one half or another where the
vertical meridian of the face seems to be an
important representational division. But we also see people who
have distortions limited to maybe just the mouth. We're
getting ready to submit a paper, but a, a
gentleman who's got mouth-specific distortions. And um You might
imagine that, well, maybe it's just the lower half
of the face, but what we do with him,
we turn the faces, let's say 90 degrees, 180
degrees, and it's still only the mouth that's distorting,
despite the fact that when we turn the face
180 degrees, now the mouth region is actually on
the top of the stimulus, but that's what's distorting
for him and say not the eyes, which are
now on the bottom. So, it's a mouth-specific distortion
for him. What he'll see. He'll see shape distortions
to the mouth. He'll also see duplications of, say,
a row of teeth, and sometimes he'll see the
duplication of the mouth that he saw. So imagine
somebody's face is in one particular viewpoint, then it
shifts. He'll see that mouth that he was viewing
a second ago, and he'll also see the mouth
that he's actually currently perceiving. So you'll see two
mouths simultaneously. It doesn't last long, but it's very
salient to him, of course.
Right, and can PMO be improved in any way?
Well, these manipulations I mentioned, you know, eyeglasses, color,
I don't know what you do with symmetry, um,
at this point, but, so yeah, those are things.
So we work with a guy in South Africa
whose distortions are reduced by green and cyan. Well,
he actually had some green lights installed in his
house. Um, AND he'll ask people, if they don't
mind, to just keep their eyeglasses on, for example,
because it reduces the distortions in their faces and,
you know, people usually don't mind doing that. So
it's simple ways sometimes that you can, you can
help people. We also have a gentleman who we've
done testing with who, like the South African man.
His distortions are reduced by green colors, and he
has some green tinted glasses that he had made.
And if he's gonna go into a crowd, where
there are gonna be a lot of people, he'll
wear these green glasses so that he's not surrounded
by what he calls demons.
Right. So, I have one last question then. Can
we learn more about how face perception and representation
work by studying conditions like prosopagnosia and PMO? And
if so, what can we learn exactly?
Yeah, I mean, that's a lot of what my
lab does, um. Let me just give you a
few examples from PMO because I think these are
easier to understand. Um, I mean, I mentioned the
face specificity, which has been a major theoretical question.
I think that's an easily understood one. With the
gentleman from Queensboro, what we did with him as
well as I mentioned the South African guy, they've
got very similar sort of distortions, limited to just
one half of the face. There's, there's been a
hypothesis for a long time that um when we
encounter a face, we represent that face, and then
we fit it into a template, a face template
that other faces that we've seen in the past
have also been fit to. And because the faces
have been standardized, it makes it easier to compare
your current percept of the face to previously seen
faces because it's easier to computationally to compare, contrast
those two faces. Um, SO that's an idea that's
been out there, but there hadn't been much good
evidence for it. So, to look at this question
about whether faces are fit into this template, what
we did with this guy who had hemi PMO,
we presented faces to him in a wide variety
of ways, but sort of the clearest and easiest
to understand is we presented them at different orientations.
And what we found is, let's say we're looking
at upright face, and he's got distortions on this
side. As we turned the face, the distortions stuck
to that side. We turn it now we turn
180 degrees. Now the distortions are actually on the
other side of the face, but it's still the
same parts of the face. And so what that
indicates is, when he sees a face, regardless of
whether it's upright, 90 degrees, 180 degrees, that face
is somehow normalized and fit into a template, and
then he's got something's not working on one half
of those um templates and That's what generates this
distortion. So that was the first really clear evidence
that we have these what are called face-centered representations,
um, in our visual system. Another really simple thing,
and if you look at these individuals who have
hemi PMO, the fact that we see this division,
that indicates the left half and the right half
of the face are processed separately. Within the visual
system. And not only that, there's good reason to
think that if I'm out looking at a face,
the face that I'm seeing that's on my right
is processed in my left hemisphere, and the face
that I'm seeing in my left is processed in
the right hemisphere. And we can see that just
based on when people have lesions to just one
side or the other. If somebody's got a lesion
in the left hemisphere, and they've got a hemi
face distortion, so only affecting one half, it's always
on the right side. Um, AND so that what
that suggests, and this is a pretty radical idea
that the left hemisphere is not used to represent
the left side of the face. This left right
is confusing I'm sure for your listeners here, but
hopefully people are getting a sense for what I'm
trying to convey.
Yeah, sure. So, before we go, where can people
find your work on the internet?
Yeah, so if people are interested in prosopagnosia, they
could go to faceblind.org. And um I think our
PMO site is facelind.org/PMO, but I'm not 100% sure,
so I would just say search for Prosopo metamorphopsia
or even just face distortions and Duchaine, my last
name, and they'll be able to find our website.
It comes up pretty clearly, uh, pretty high up
in the search results.
Great. So, Doctor Duchen, thank you so much for
taking the time to come on the show. It's
been a pleasure to talk with you.
Thanks a lot, Ricardo.
Hi guys, thank you for watching this interview until
the end. If you liked it, please share it,
leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by Nights Learning and
Development done differently, check their website at Nights.com and
also please consider supporting the show on Patreon or
PayPal. I would also like to give a huge
thank you to my main patrons and PayPal supporters
Pergo Larsson, Jerry Mullerns, Fredrik Sundo, Bernard Seyches Olaf,
Alexand Castle, Matthew Whitting Barna Wolf, Tim Hollis, Erika
Lenny, John Connors, Philip Fors Connolly. Then the Matter
Robert Windegaruyasi Zu Mark Neevs called in Holbrookfield governor
Michael Stormir, Samuel Andre, Francis Forti Agnseroro and Hal
Herzognun Macha Joan Labrant John Jasent and Samuel Corriere,
Heinz, Mark Smith, Jore, Tom Hummel, Sardus France David
Sloan Wilson, asilla dearraujurumen ro Diego Londono Correa. Yannick
Punter Darusmani Charlotte blinikolbar Adamhn Pavlostaevsky nale back medicine,
Gary Galman Samovalliriei Poltonin John Barboza, Julian Price, Edward
Hall Edin Bronner, Douglas Fry, Franco Bartolotti Gabrielon Corteseus
Slelitsky, Scott Zachary Fitim Duffyani Smith John Wieman. Daniel
Friedman, William Buckner, Paul Georgianeau, Luke Lovai Giorgio Theophanous,
Chris Williamson, Peter Vozin, David Williams, the Augusta, Anton
Eriksson, Charles Murray, Alex Shaw, Marie Martinez, Coralli Chevalier,
bungalow atheists, Larry D. Lee Junior, old Erringbo. Sterry
Michael Bailey, then Sperber, Robert Grayigoren, Jeff McMann, Jake
Zu, Barnabas radix, Mark Campbell, Thomas Dovner, Luke Neeson,
Chris Storry, Kimberly Johnson, Benjamin Gilbert, Jessica Nowicki, Linda
Brandon, Nicholas Carlsson, Ismael Bensleyman. George Eoriatis, Valentin Steinman,
Perkrolis, Kate van Goller, Alexander Aubert, Liam Dunaway, BR
Masoud Ali Mohammadi, Perpendicular John Nertner, Ursulauddinov, Gregory Hastings,
David Pinsoff Sean Nelson, Mike Levine, and Jos Net.
A special thanks to my producers. These are Webb,
Jim, Frank Lucas Steffinik, Tom Venneden, Bernard Curtis Dixon,
Benedict Muller, Thomas Trumbull, Catherine and Patrick Tobin, Gian
Carlo Montenegroal Ni Cortiz and Nick Golden, and to
my executive producers Matthew Levender, Sergio Quadrian, Bogdan Kanivets,
and Rosie. Thank you for all.